# Naive Bayes Classification for Spam Email Detection

The purpose of this study is to gain an understanding of a Big Data method not covered in CHEMENG 4H03 scope, which was chosen to be the Naive Bayes Classification method. The pipeline flow is based on the article: 10.1109/ICCONS.2018.866295.

## Problem Formulation
### Prolem Setup
The spam detection problem consists of a binary class label, Y = {y_1,y_2}, for spam and non-spam, which in the study is presented as 0 for non-spam and 1 for spam, and a list of emails with n number of features/vocabularies, x={x_1,x_2,…,x_n}. The Naïve Bayes classifier uses the Bayes theorem to assign a class, represented by equation (1).

P(y│x)=  (P(x│y)P(y))/(P(x))	(1)

## Method

### Overview
Based on the flow from the article, the implementation will first be carried out using a “toy example” of 20 short emails generated by Claude. In the initial stage, where errors tend to occur and frequent modifications are needed, developing with a dataset of 1000 emails would be computationally expensive and time-consuming. This is why it would be more ideal to complete a full pipeline with a smaller dataset for easier and faster error detection and modifications verification.

Compared to the study, this implementation, however, will not include the correlation-based feature selection (CFS) [article]. All vocabularies obtained from the dataset will be used for the studies with the aim to reduce computational complexity.

### Initial Approach - Toy Example
The “toy example” dataset of 10 spam and 10 non-spam emails is split into 12 training points – 6 spam and 6 non-spam – and 8 testing points – 4 spam and 4 non-spam – to prevent biased results. The final precision was 100%, indicating that the false negative value was 0; thus, all emails identified as spam were spam emails. The recall, however, were 33.3%, which means that some spam emails were identified as non-spam. This was expected because the training data only contains 6 short emails, not sufficient to cover all spam vocabularies to provide an accurate prediction. Regardless, the precision showed that the program was functioning correctly, and increasing the data size would allow for a higher recall rate. Thus, this implementation was then used on the Ling spam dataset.

### Full Dataset Approach - Ling Spam Dataset
Overall, there was no significant modification in the pipeline compared to what was used for the smaller data set. Because data were manually extracted to get an even number of spam and non-spam emails, this was changed to match the number of emails in the Ling Spam set – 1000 samples with 600 training data and 400 testing data. Another minor modification was that with a larger dataset, some sections were really time-consuming due to nested loops, which were then changed to improve runtime. 

Besides the approach in the study, additional case studies were also carried out to understand the full behaviour of the classifier. The first one was the PSO, which followed the integrated approach in the study. The others involved uneven data extraction, extra preprocessing, and the use of external packages in Python. These two did not include the PSO algorithm, as the main goal of this study is to investigate the NB classification method. 


